Hello, I'm Armen
and sometimes recently,
rather more common than not, I'm sharing
a decoding and just LLM stuff on this
channel. And
since May, there has been an explosion
of different kind of aent decoding
tools.
And I wanted to give you a little bit of
an update um of which tools exist and
what I have learned in general about
them in in the last couple of weeks in
particular.
So if you're on this channel, you
probably already know who I am. I
created a lot of open source software
over the years, particularly in the
Python ecosystem. And as of recently,
I'm kind of obsessed with a chendic
coding tools and I'm trying my best to
use a lot of them uh to help me build my
new startup.
One of the ways in which I think we
should look at the current point in time
is that there has been an explosion of
interest both from investors and from
users
um and programmers in general um about
uh this this general topic of using
aic tool loops um to help us build
software.
And this has primarily resulted in tools
that help us write more code. But
there's also a little bit of um the same
kind of pattern being applied for
non-coding agent. But most of what's
currently making its internet is
combination of a very good foundation
model with some achantic tool. A lot of
them are moving for some reason or
another into the command line and
it has been very hard to keep track of
everything because every single day a
new tool pops up and then there are also
different models that they can use with
them and some tools support multiple
models and so forth and I just wanted to
give my best understanding of what's
going on right now um as I as sort of my
experience has has told me so far
and I do want to be very clear that I do
not want to recommend an agent here. So,
I actually not recommend anything at
all. I just want to share a little bit
how I'm thinking about all of this and
where this might be going. And I also
apologize for calling them agents.
There's a lot of discussion of this is
an appropriate name or not. It's
probably not an appropriate name. Um,
but it is what it is. This is what
seemingly we're calling this now. So,
it's it's a when and I use agent here.
It's sort of an agentic coding tool in
one form or another.
Um just to level set this here roughly
we're looking at
five different types of tools. Um some
of them are IDE extensions. So uh GitHub
copilot cursor are probably the most
well-known ones well-known ones. They uh
they're both autocomplete but they can
also do u basic coding loops. Cursor can
actually do very capable coding loops at
this point in parts also because cursor
has recently moved into the CLI as well
and they are also providing these
standalone
um agents. So cursor for instance can
run on uh remote server 2 they have
these background agents then the tools
like a devon which are also I think they
bought vinsurf currently recently. So
these are all kind of these are
different kind of tools exist and then
we have these
vibe coding tools that use very much the
same kind of technology behind the
scenes. So they they're running
autogenerating running in a tool loop
but they often uh very targeted towards
user interface creation and they behave
quite a bit different from what you can
do with um with a tool like uh Cloud
Code or Similar which really have a they
run on your machine and they can do
pretty much everything that you give
them access to And
when I recorded this last video here,
there was really just a handful of tools
that were capable of competing with uh
cloud code, which was one of the first,
if not the first, that got mass
adoption. But by now, honestly, there
are so many of them. I I don't even want
to enumerate them. But um I think there
more than 30 different kind of command
line tools at this point that that have
some version of aentic coding loop
and
I don't have the time to look at all of
those tools. Right? This is this is
really not um I I don't have the time
for that and I don't think honestly
anyone has time for that. But there are
some reasons of why you want to look at
more than one than one tool. uh for me
one of which is there has been a
discussion recently about pricing and I
will go into that later but because
there is a worry that um
we might be heavily being subsidized by
venture capital here that the the cost
of all of this will go up. So people
have been starting to look into um can
you use open models to do the same thing
and
for one reason or another there are
limitations in some of the tools that
we're currently using. And it's very
helpful to understand if those
limitations are related to the coding
agent versus if they're related to the
model and what this might mean in the
future.
I don't want to talk too much about what
kind of workloads work really well with
aentic coding tools today, but I do want
to mention that
one of the main unlocks that I see today
in
Agentic coding tools is the creation of
software that
can be perpetual prototypes.
And some very good examples of this are
internal tools.
You might have been in a situation
multiple times through your career where
you wish you would have had a slightly
better debugging tool, but you also
didn't have the time at this very moment
to create them. And this is actually one
of the ways in which I really enjoy
using these tools is that I'm working on
something, but I can also have the agent
on the side provide me a better way to
visualize my data or a better way to
debug a particular problem. and write a
tool in a way that I can maybe use it a
couple of times that makes this this
flow generally more enjoyable and
to create these tools
you're kind of in a situation where you
want to be able to see what they do and
interrupt and steer them. So it's it's a
little bit of a combination of both
hands off and hands on
which is very different from
tools which are fully detached. Devon is
a good example here. I think a lot of
the tools that um sit as uh GitHub
extensions on the pull request are a
little bit like this because it's much
harder to understand if a change that
you're doing to a prompt or a tool setup
or something like this has a positive or
negative effect. So these these command
line based tools or this IDE integrated
tools they're very they they make it
easier for do rather quick
experimentation but it is still very
hard and I will share a little bit later
of why I think it's so hard to evaluate
this.
So
last time I talked about this I think I
made this assumption that there's a
little bit more of an understanding of
how these tools work. And I actually
think that what I've discovered over the
last couple of weeks is that there's a
lack of understanding how they actually
work. And this does make a sense a
little bit because on the one hand it
seems very simple. It's a LLM that runs
inference and then calls a bunch of
tools.
But if you go into the nitty-gritty
details of how these agents work, there
are
some really rather important aspects to
it that can fundamentally change how
they behave.
And this also directly translates to
their capabilities
and what they cost and how long they
run. So
the very basic behavior is obvious,
right? There's an aentic coding tool
which has a system prompt that tells it
something. It takes a user prompt and
then it runs into a loop with a bunch of
tools until the agent thinks it's done.
Um,
but
how all of this goes together and and
how they are actually capable of doing
that and why we're actually seeing
progress in these tools I think is is is
rather subtle.
So the most important tools that an
agent needs is the ability to read a
file. And what does it mean? It
basically means that the agent is
interested in seeing something. And it
it reads the file and it reads it into
its context. In order to understand
which files it might want to read, it
needs to find this code. And so for
instance, cloud code and a bunch of
other tools, they use tools like grap,
usually rip grap to
have an idea of what they're looking for
and then to find the file names and then
they use that to pull it into the
context. It's a combination of grap and
the read file that will bring files into
context.
Once it has determined that it want to
make some changes, it needs to use
another tool to change the files on
disk.
And then
for the hint decoding loop to work best,
you need to be able to execute commands.
And this is particularly important for
things like can this even compile? Like
the the most useful ability for an agent
in many ways is just to understand if
llinters pass, if the compiler is able
to compile it and uh is it able to run
the program that you have just changed.
for some things. It also is capable of
doing web searches or fetching remote
files, things like that. These are also
useful. And with these tools,
there are some some rather subtle
aspects to it
which influence the quality of this.
And I will go into this, but what you
should think of with these tools is that
you you don't wake up in the morning and
you determine as an agent agent decoding
tool writer that you want to add a new
tool to it. In a way, you are because
this is what MCP does. But the best
performing tools, they have been trained
into the LLM in one form or another. So
the the foundation model that you're
using to some degree is an understanding
of these tools.
And the consequence of this fundamental
understanding of tooling is that there
is some sort of binding between a
particular coding agent
uh or the the the tool used by a
decoding agent and the model that it's
using. Um so
there are different kind of models that
you can use. Um, so for instance,
Sonnet, you can use GPD5.
And some of these models have been
trained not just with the knowledge that
a tool exists, but also seemingly with a
whole bunch of examples of what it
means. Um, and Entropic actually does a
pretty good job at documenting most of
these tools
in their documentation. So if you go to
the API documentation on the Sonnet
family of models or the Opus family of
models, they will document these tools.
So it's in a bash tool. So it
understands how to run bash commands and
through the bash command, it also
understands how to run Python.
It has a code execution command. It has
this computer use command. Neither of
which I believe are actually being used
by
cloud code. I think they might be used
by cloud desktop, although I'm not sure.
There's a text editor command um that
that has been specifically trained on
manipulating text web search command and
so forth. But for instance, if you use
the GPT OSS model, you will rather
quickly figure out that it loves to call
a tool called search even if it hasn't
been supplied to the context,
particularly in the smaller model. And
there the sort of the interesting
element of this is that um codeex also
doesn't have a search tool even though
codex is written by uh openai who also
supply choss
and the answer seemingly is that this is
a tool that's being executed by the
inference platform and not by
the coding agent. And this is probably
similar to the web search tool although
again I'm not really familiar how it's
supposed to be used but these tools
effectively do not provide um normally
if you run a tool you basically say like
hey here here are the tools that you can
use the LLM
exposes
uh will reply so it will reply with a
JSON blob or some XML blob or something
similar saying like hey I want to use
this tool then you would in the end
decoding loop execute the tool and
provide write the results back and it
makes another another turn with the
server side or the inference side tools.
What actually happens is that you're not
supposed to be able to call these tools
because they will be called
automatically behind the scenes. The
results of those tools invocation will
be immediately fed back into the prompt
and then they make a turn further. And
one of the results of this is the
primary result of this is that if your
agent does not match the tools with
those models, then the experience that
you're going to get from that agent is
worse. And
I I really really don't want to name any
HD coding tools today, but um
particularly coding tools that allow you
to swap out the model and that are kind
of open-ended to which model you can use
are also not necessarily going to map
the tools
um exactly with either prompt and or uh
tool naming or tool providing to those
models.
Um, and you can you can sort of see this
a little bit. Um, the with the GPT5
release, um, there were a bunch of day
one tools that came out which had access
to GPT5 for 2 weeks or more. And at
least on the first two days when I tried
them, they outperformed tools which only
added support for GPD5 on the first day.
uh presumably because they got a little
bit of a heads up of of how they should
match up uh prompts and tool usage.
The
it's not just the tools that you provide
that can have a significant impact on
the agent's performance. In some cases,
there are pre-flights and post-flights
to
uh each decoding loop. So
I will go with the example of clot here
uh clot code. Um,
there's a a little
spinning indicator to the left of your
prompt which sort of makes up a little
fancy QT description
and that comes by running uh the the
request also through haiku which is one
of the fast models and they will also
for any tool usage that is emitted by
the main model uh which is usually cl
usually set or ous they will also run it
through haiku um in a form of like llm
as a judge to figure out if it's safe to
run this tool or not.
Which for instance means that is much
less likely that clot code will
delete the wrong file or will work
outside of its working directory or at
least outside of your project's
directory then an agent will that skips
that step.
Um it is very possible for um an agent
to emit commands
which are highly inappropriate to use
and having the second LLM make a sanity
check on it will get rid of some of
those users not all of them but some of
them. And so for instance, I know for a
fact that not every single agent
decoding tool that exists today is safe
to run with yodo mode, which is
basically full permissions. Um in fact
um quite a few of them do not properly
protect to the same degree that some
others do.
There's a second problem also which is
that once you give the agent the ability
to run code, you also have to
figure out what to do if that code
doesn't run properly. And
there are definitely big quality
differences in the tools ability to run
executables.
So for instance um
some tools get stuck and never recover.
Um I I ran this yesterday. I will not
name the agent that I was using but I
ran any agent yesterday at night before
I went to bed. Actually I ran three
agents um with one prompt overnight same
prompt just to see how they're using the
same model um differently. And two out
of three agents got stuck and never
recovered. and they got stuck
in different places. One of them got
stuck because uh they ran a tool which
brought up a prompt and they just didn't
figure out and didn't kill it. And the
other one got stuck because it made an
HTTP request seemingly that got stuck
somehow and it didn't recover from that.
And I and I could I could see that it
was doing that because there was no tool
usage being um or I was assuming it was
doing this because there was no tool
usage at that time. It was effectively
an inference step.
and the token counter did not increase
anymore. It was just stuck there. And it
was either because the response that it
got back from the server
um let it locally get stuck in a loop.
But my point here is that
there are some tools which have been
already battle tested for autonomous use
for extended period of time and some of
which haven't. um even though they might
be using the exact same underlying
model.
And so this this really puts us in this
really unfortunate situation where it is
even with the same model very hard to
evaluate the quality of an agent and
seemingly I think to me it has become
harder.
If you look at Swebench for instance or
things like this, you will get a bunch
of numbers, but they don't necessarily
tell you everything. Um, there too many
different workloads that we're throwing
at these things. And there also seems to
be some form of benchmark manipulation
going on. Um, I don't think if this
necessarily nefarious. This might just
be an accidental benchmark optimization
by um just running it in a SW bench and
see how it's doing. and and if those
tests don't change all that much then uh
maybe it just optimized towards that but
for instance um when GP5 launched
it it looked very appealing and it
probably is very appealing that is
significantly cheaper than the entropic
models are.
The problem today is that if I just
compare
their official CLI or cursor with cloud
code, I notice that it uses many more
tokens tokens and many more turns. So
some of the savings that you get from
the cheaper per token cost are negated
by less efficient
agentic loops.
And even inference and turns doesn't
necessarily take turn tell you how long
it's going to take because there are
also other things um that influence the
overall speed that it takes you to
um get a good result. So there's
actually some benefit to oneshotting a
good result because you're less likely
to go into iteration which might be
slow. On the other hand, um
if you are
making
iterative improvements
and you also run the right tools all the
time afterwards, sometimes that can
actually result in uh better code
quality overall. I think that Sonnet
loves to write wrong code, but because
it is also rather eager to run the
tools, it overall
results in better looking code
quicker than you would achieve that same
result right now in some versions of
Jupit.
Um,
and some agents are at least
functionally capable of parallelization
even though that is not necessarily
always possible. Um, but there's so many
different ways in which these models can
and these agents can behave differently.
That's very very hard to evaluate. Um,
and I just generally want to caution
everybody on a lot of takes that you can
get on Twitter and elsewhere because
it is really really hard to I think at
least it is really hard to get a good
sense of what works and doesn't work.
And I also noticed that in many ways
what prevents me from using a tool today
is is actually not necessarily the
quality of the code that it writes or
the quality of the inference but really
annoying things. So for instance, one of
the agents that I actually think I would
like quite a lot, I don't enjoy the user
interface of and so I'm less likely to
use that. Another person might have a
different uh opinion on it. Um but there
there's so many different kind of things
that influence how you interact with a
tool that it can also then compromise
the results that you're going to get.
So it is very hard to evaluate
um and I think that a lot of people are
attached to one of the tools that
they're using particular if they already
start paying for it
and
I do think it's important for us to get
some better sentiment of evaluating this
uh in particular also because I think is
unsustainable to have that many tools
that will have to consolidate down and
the way we're evaluating sometimes is
just really kind of wrong.
Um,
particularly I think in the last two
weeks there was a lot of discussion
about like who has the nicest looking
terminal UI or the best performing
terminal UI. Um, I also don't like how
the terminal renderer of most of those
tools around and and is
annoying. At the same time,
that's not the most pressing issue that
I have with an achantic coding tool. And
I also think that longterm the terminal
UI is not where we want to end up. Um so
there are many ways to evaluate it but
really what we should be evaluating on
is like how good is it daytoday in
solving the problems that we're throwing
at these tools. And I I don't think
we're doing a particularly good job
right now or at least in general I find
um Twitter to be an horrible uh source
of high signal information on that
topic.
for evaluating models, I think it's even
harder because there's so many
trade-offs on it. At the moment, I think
they're basically
a handful of models that are capable of
doing this. Um, the most significant
ones are, of course, the entropic
models, OPUS, and Sonnet. Um, GBD5. Uh,
actually there's also Gemini in there. I
kind of forgot about this, but um, I
think GBD5 and Gemini are both fantastic
models for code generation.
Gemini didn't perform particularly great
for tool usage. Some of which can be
compensated by um by the tool. So Gemini
CLI for instance got quite a bit better
recently
by just recovering better from bad tool
usage.
Um, I think with Chifi, it's a little
bit too early to say, but it looks from
the initial feedback on people that got
it already for two weeks or so that that
it's pretty pretty capable. And then
there's a growing number of open weights
models that are at least
capable of tool calls and I think
they're very interesting for all kinds
of different reasons. So for instance
quens recoder I don't know if it has
been trained on any particular tool but
seemingly it is it is at least
quite a capable tool caller.
Um
I think this is very interesting. Um
Kimmy is also a seemingly capable tool.
There's also the GML GLM model which I
haven't tried yet. Um many of these
models though the open weight ones come
in very different sizes. So if you go to
open router um you can pick different
ones if you run them locally. They can
run sort of different systems like
there's a pretty significant difference
in behavior sometimes between uh LM
studio and uh on open router it's almost
a slot machine about if that model comes
as advertised or not.
Um
I forgot for which model it was. It
might have been GPTOSS where people
reported a wildly different uh measured
performance difference for tool calling
reliability between the different
providers on open router. And it also
looked like um the initial source
release of the harmony
um new token system, whatever you want
to call this, had some bugs that people
walked around in different ways. Um, so
all of this makes it just so much harder
to evaluate this. And I I want to
reiterate this. I think it's very hard
to estimate the costs right now because
just because a a token is cheaper
doesn't mean that you're going to be
cheaper off um than with another one.
And also I think I didn't write this
here but I think another way of also
investigating this is there was a lot of
excitement in the first couple of days
for Serbus and Grock that they're going
to be dramatically faster for
um for these agents. But the challenge
is that it doesn't seem like that is a
consistent uh experience and in some
cases just being faster doesn't help you
if you're also worse or that inference
is necessarily the most expensive piece
here. So for instance pure throughput
uh in some cases is higher on some
hosting platforms but time to first
token um is also higher which in many
cases compensates a lot. So it is it is
really really really hard to evaluate. I
just want to point this out once again.
Um I have no idea how to do this better
yet. But many of the benchmarks are kind
of misleading and I think we need to
just share a little bit the practical
results and experience that we have.
Um
this is basically just a why is
everything so crazy. Um it's very clear
that there's something really cool here.
There's a lot of value um being
possible with these models, particularly
if the agent and tool combination works
out really well. Um I think almost
everybody can use one of the agents to
build another agent. So there's there's
there's only going to be more for a
little while on these just because it's
so much fun to build them, too. Um and
it's kind of shocking how many people
raise money right now on more coding
agents. Um I don't I don't understand
the the motivation here, but it it it
doesn't stop. Uh there's so many more
and because we haven't found a good way
to evaluate them, I I think it's also
very hard to evaluate the quality of an
agent. I'm evaluating the quality of one
agent in particular. I still use cloud
code most of the time um because I got
used to that and I I have one eval where
I run in regular intervals the same task
on my codebase just to see if it doesn't
get worse. I basically want to make sure
that my codebase stays in a state where
the agent
doesn't get meaningfully worse. But even
that evaluation I can only run against
cloud code
just because of some of the behaviors
that it has like I cannot I currently
have this not set up in a way where I
could use open code here or why I could
use crush or Gemini CLI right this is is
a very very specific to how I'm
evaluating cloud code um and this is
just for me to evaluate that my codebase
does not get worse
last thing here is pricing. Um
there was an interview with Daria
recently. Uh it was a podcast somewhere
where he mentioned that they
underestimated how many people would use
uh
the Claude Max subscription to the
degree that they did. Um I know a
handful of people that have gotten a lot
of value out of it. um thousands of
dollars worth of value out of a $200
subscription.
Um so so there is a there's some
pressure coming in right now to uh put
higher rate limits up. But if you look
into how could you get tokens cheaper,
you will discover that it's not possible
for you to come to those token pricings
for self-hosting. There are H100s,
H200s, P200s, whatever they are called,
uh, on the internet. You can rent them
for a couple of hours. You can rent them
for longer. But if you want to end up
with a self-hosted open weights model,
it is going to be more expensive than if
you buy those minutes on open router.
That's the situation that we find
ourselves in today. And your experience
is also not necessarily going to work
all that well. Um, even some of the open
weights models require a lot of hacks
for you to self-host them reliably. And
that might also explain why some of the
model providers that you can find an
open router for the same model have
worse performance. There's there's a lot
of stuff in the stack. So for instance
when GPT OSS launched there were a bunch
of bugs filed against open uh code and
other tools that the responses coming
from GPT OSS were wrong but it was
actually a bug or limitation in the
underlying O lama and LM studio where
that issue appeared and so that fixing
that problem in open code would would
not be correct because the
transformation should happen one layer
down. Um but at the same time as I have
already seen uh some fixes landing in
some of the code coding tools
specifically for for that. So it's it's
kind of tricky to say um
where where this um
where this goes. I think right now there
there's a only limited
um motivation for people to get these
open models running. uh but but some
people are trying right and so maybe as
more people as the cost might go down
there might be more people trying it
there might be better tooling around it
you might actually get to the point
where maybe 10 people can share two
H200s and get a decent experience out of
it um but but we're not there today and
even more so locally running models I I
think you're just going to have a really
bad time with them I I I try regularly
to see how far they get and GBTOSS S and
a bunch of others quence recoder the um
the smaller variant
they're definitely capable of running
but they give up early they sometimes
call the wrong tools um I haven't found
a good agent agent decoding tool that is
really tweaked for them um so it's it's
just too early right now um but I would
just generally say like unless you
you're really motivated to try this
there's not much of a point in doing
that there's a price pressure per token
um that's visible. Uh GBD5 launched for
a lower token price than the entropic
models, but overall we're using many
more tokens. Um the the the problems
that we're throwing at these agents,
they are still largely constrained by
how much we can throw into the context.
And so for for quite a while longer, our
the number of tokens we're going to
throw at these are going to go up. And
so as a result, I just generally expect
that the cost will also go up. And
that's all I have at the moment. So I
have absolutely no recommendations of
which agents you should be using, but I
just want to share a little bit what
I've learned on this.
And um and I encourage everybody to
share their experiences, their genuine
experiences, not their quick takes on
Twitter. Like write blog posts, like
long form content, share what you really
did with it.
That is so much more valuable than any
quick tweet
that
has a face blown emoji or something like
this. We don't need more of that. That's
already we have enough of that. But what
we need is genuine experiences with
these tools. Um and and some
consolidation to few of them that it's
just too much.
Um yeah. So thank you for listening. I
hope this was useful in one form or